# Recursive templating

Go templates can call themselves inside with a part of data they are invoked with. This functionality enables us to use templates to print structures like breadcrumbs and sitemap.

## Printing breadcrumbs

**Breadcrumbs** are basically a **traceback** (you might be familiar to this term from DFS) from one of the "leaves" of the sitemap all the way through to the root following each parent in the **ancestry**.

**To print** a breadcrumb section you can start with `TemplateContent.Node` and follow `Node.Parent` values until you hit a `Node` value its `.Parent` is `nil`, which would only happen if that `Node` value is for the root of site (eg. `example.com`)

As the "depth" of any ancestry is not same at each direction, printing a breadcumb needs recursion, as called **recursive templating** in templating context. Recursion, —based on the **termination condition**— can grow to arbitrary levels of depth in any direction of a **tree** based on a boolean expression on the currently visited node keeps evaluating to true.

Here is the full snippet of `"breadcrumb-item"`, that the most of what you need to print a full breadcrumb list:

```go-html-template
{{define "breadcrumb-item"}}
  {{with .Parent}}
    {{template "breadcrumb-item"}}
    <span class="separator"></span>
  {{end}}

  {{if ne .Href ""}}
    <a href="{{.Href}}">{{.Title}}</a>
  {{else}}
    <span>{{.Title}}</span>
  {{end}}
{{end}}
```

There are couple points here might come strange to beginners:

1. 1st line states this snippet is a template **definition**. Without a `"page"` or `"markdown-page"` named template calling this template, it would not be printed on the page.
1. 2nd line acts like a **termination condition** that stops the recursion on the root. In general, termination condition is what stops the recursive function to create an **infinite recursion**. Here, the condition is only protecting us from getting a templating error otherwise would occur inside the next recursion, where `"breacrumb-item"` is invoked with a `nil` value.
1. 3rd line starts the recursion before printing the current `.Node.Title`. This is important to print the breadcrumb items in usual ordering, from root on the left to the current page on the right.
1. 4th line prints a separator, meant to be placed between each parent-child pair. Notice this line is specifically placed inside the `{{with .Parent}}...{{end}}` block. This is only one way of printing `n-1` number of separators in an `n` items ancestry.
1. 7th to 11th lines are just for printing the current `Node` the template is invoked with. The condition block is here to decide which HTML tag to use to represent the current item in document. If the current `Node` has an `.Href` value other than `""`, then it is **visitable** which is best represented with an anchor `<a>` tag to let visitor to click on it. Notice for the other possibility, a `<span>` tag is used without `.Href` value printed.

From your `"page"` or `"markdown-page"`, call the `"breadcrumb-item"` with `.Node`:

```go-html-template
{{define "markdown-page"}}
  <html>
    <head>
    </head>
    <body>
      <nav id="breadcrumbs">
        {{template "breadcrumb-item" .Node}}
      </nav>
    </body>
  </html>
{{end}}
```

> One `.tmpl` file can house more than one template definitions. Kask only looks for the `"page"` or `"markdown-page"` to use as an entry point for rendering a webpage. Other templates are still processed regardless of what file they are defined and supplied to the Go template engine.

## Printing sitemap

The only thing to do for **printing a sitemap** is following regular DFS order and printing the `.Title` (and `.Href` if populated) of each `Node`. Unlike printing breadcrumbs, printing of sitemap starts from the `TemplateContent.Root`.

```go-html-template
{{define "sitemap-item"}}
  {{if ne .Href ""}}
    <a href="{{.Href}}">{{.Title}}</a>
  {{else}}
    <span>{{.Title}}</span>
  {{end}}

  {{with .Children}}
    <ul>
      {{range .}}
        <li>{{template "sitemap-item" .}}</li>
      {{end}}
    </ul>
  {{end}}
{{end}}
```

Notice that this time, we make the recursive call in 11th line after we print the current `Node` in lines [2-6]. This is because sitemaps usually state the parent then its children.

Don't hesitate to tweak locations of `<ul>` and `<li>` tags. There are many ways of printing a nested list structure with DFS.

Trigger the placement of sitemap by adding a `"sitemap-item"` call with the `TemplateContent.Root` passed in; just as in below:

```go-html-template
{{define "markdown-page"}}
  <html>
    <head>
    </head>
    <body>
      <nav id="sitemap">
        {{template "sitemap-item" .Root}}
      </nav>
    </body>
  </html>
{{end}}
```
